#summary What the different data structures represent

= Data Types =

Term: A Narsese statement

Sentence: A term with a specific punctuation, a truth value and a stamp.

Goal: Sentence with ! as punctuation. (with specific desire value)
Judgement: Sentence with ! as punctuation. (with specific truth value)
Quest: Sentence with @ as punctuation. (question of desire value)
Question: Sentence with ? as punctuation. (question of truth value)

Task: A sentence with a budget value and a placeholder for a solution which is a sentence (answer to a question or truth value of a goal which measures to what extent it is already fullfilled).

Stamp: Creation Time, Occurence Time, Evidental Base, Derivation Chain.
Exists in order to give the sentence information like
from where it was derived (in order to avoid reasoning cycles, derivation chain), from which input it was derived (needed because it is not allowed to allow revision on overlapping evidental base), its temporal information or tense (occurence time), and its creation time (when it was derived/when it entered memory) 


Concept: This is the most complex data type in the system which adds some additional terminology:
A concept is named by one term.
A concept links to other concepts with different budget with tasks which are here called TaskLinks.
A concept links to other concepts with termlinks, linking to exactly those concepts/terms who share a common term in bi-directional manner.

A concept also consist of:

 * Beliefs, which are judgements sorted according to confidence.

 * Desires, which are goals of the concept sorted according to confidence of desire.

 * Questions, which are questions of the concept.